Theory Questions
1. What is a Certificate Authority (CA)?

A Certificate Authority (CA) is a trusted organization or entity that issues and digitally signs SSL/TLS certificates. The CA verifies the identity of the certificate owner and establishes trust between clients and servers. Browsers and operating systems trust certificates issued by recognized CAs.

2. Why is a CA required?

A CA is required to:

Verify the identity of the certificate owner.
Prevent impersonation and man-in-the-middle attacks.
Digitally sign certificates so clients can trust them.
Enable secure HTTPS communication using SSL/TLS.

Without a trusted CA, clients cannot verify the authenticity of a server's certificate.

3. How does cert-manager issue certificates?

cert-manager automates certificate management in Kubernetes:

A Certificate resource is created.
cert-manager detects the new resource.
It sends a certificate request to the configured Issuer or ClusterIssuer.
The issuer signs the certificate.
cert-manager stores the certificate and private key in a Kubernetes TLS Secret.
Applications or Gateways reference this Secret to enable HTTPS.
4. What happens when a certificate expires?

When a certificate expires:

HTTPS clients no longer trust the certificate.
Browsers display security warnings.
TLS connections may fail.
Applications using the certificate may become inaccessible over HTTPS until a new valid certificate is installed.
5. How does automatic renewal work?

cert-manager continuously monitors certificate expiration dates. Before a certificate expires (typically around 30 days in advance, depending on configuration), it automatically requests a new certificate from the configured issuer, updates the Kubernetes Secret with the renewed certificate, and workloads using the Secret can continue serving HTTPS without manual intervention.

6. How would you verify a certificate from the command line?

Using OpenSSL:

openssl s_client -connect web.company.local:443

View certificate details:

openssl x509 -in certificate.crt -text -noout

Verify the certificate against a CA:

openssl verify -CAfile ca.crt certificate.crt

